Today we're going to talk about two terms
that you can find in nearly any introduction

to Sociology textbook, our status and roles.
Statuses are socially defined positions that

people carry. For example, being a father
or a mother, being a son or a daughter. Each

one of these is a status that an individual
holds. Each of one of these are social positions

that people occupy. We don't just have one
status, we have multiple statuses. An individual

can have the status of being a father, but
also have the status of being a son. An individual

can have the status of being a mother, but
also have the status of being a daughter.

That's because we each have multiple statuses
at any given time. At any given time, we each

have dozens of statuses. We might be a father,
and a husband, and an employee, a partier,

a friend, and a student. At any given time,
we can have all of these statuses, and many,

many more. We can also divide the type of
status we have into two categories: those

that we work for and those that are given
to us. Those statuses that we work for are

called achieved statuses. While those are
placed upon us or given to us are ascribed

statuses.
Achieved statuses are the result of some individual

action. Achieved statuses are statuses that
we have achieved, statuses that we have worked

for. While ascribed statuses are placed upon
the individual. These are statuses that are

given to us, statuses that we do not have
to work for. They were simply placed upon

us. Being a nurse, a father, or a counselor,
each of these are achieved statuses, because

each of these requires effort. Each of these
requires individual action. You can't simply

walk into a hospital and say, "Hey, I want
to become a nurse," and then become a nurse.

Of course not.
To become a nurse, you have to earn it. You

have to go to school, study hard, pass exams,
get your license, and then become a nurse.

Likewise, to be a counselor. Can you simply
buy a couch and open up a practice? Of course

not. In order to become a counselor, you have
to go to school, get your license, and earn

it that status of being a counselor. While
achieved statuses, we work for, ascribed statuses,

we do not. For example, our gender is ascribed
to us. We don't get to choose whether we'll

be male or female. We aren't asked if we are
born, "Hey, do you want to be a boy or a girl?"

It is placed upon us. It is beyond our control.
Making it an ascribed status.

Likewise, our race is an ascribed status.
We don't decide what our race will be. It

is again placed upon us. In some cases, a
wealth might also be ascribed. Not our income,

because income we work for, but our wealth,
especially at a young age. If we our born

into a wealthy family, well then we might
have a high wealth status that was given to

us, that was ascribed to us. Or if we're born
into poverty, well again that's another status

that we don't necessarily have a say over, it was
ascribed to us, especially if we're young.

Now clearly, we all have multiple statuses.
We all have many, many achieved statuses and

many ascribed statuses.
But the one status that holds special meaning

for an individual's life is the master status.
The one status that affects us the most is

our master status. This is not necessarily
in our control. Think of it this way. Consider

the master status, the once status that other
people focus on. When people come in contact

with you, which one of your dozens of statuses
do others focus on? They focus on you being

a father, a son, a student, an employee, which
of your one status they focus on is the master

status.
For example, let's say you have a son by the

name of Tom, and everywhere you go, people
know you as Tom's father. Go to the good store,

you are Tom's father. Go to the soccer practice,
you are Tom's father. Or in that case, your

master status is being a father. In that case,
it's an achieved status of being a father.

Or let's say you're a doctor, and everywhere
you go, people know you as Dr. Bob. Well in

that case, your master status is being a doctor.
Those two examples: the master status is achieved,

something we work for. But that's not always
the case. Our master status might also be

ascribed.
For example, let's say you're a doctor but

you're female, and your co-workers and you
have patients, see you as a female doctor,

then we'll focus on you being a doctor. But
instead of focus on you being a doctor who

is female, well in that case, our master status
might be being female. Again, we don't decide

our self what our master status will be. Our
master status might be achieved, but then

might be ascribed. It is not up to us. It
is bases on mostly others, what status do

others emphasize, what status do other focus
on.

Next are roles. Roles are the rules of behavior
associated with a particular status. Roles

are the norms, unexpected behaviors of a particular
status. Each status we have comes with it:

a set of roles, a set of expectations of how
we are to behave. For example, being an employee

is a status, and with that status are multiple
roles, with that status are multiple rules

of how we should behave. As an employee, we
are expected to come to work on time. We are

expected to stay until the work is completed.
We are expected not to leave early. Of course,

there are many other roles associated with
that status of being an employee.

Another status that we met in before is being
a parent. With that status of being a parent

comes with it, many roles. With that status
of being a parent comes many expected behaviors.

I'm sure you cannot name several expected
behaviors of being a parent. Some examples

of what we expect from parents is to be loving,
nurturing, providing, but also would necessary

to discipline the child. Again, each status
has multiple roles which can create a problem.

Not only do we have multiple statuses,
we have multiple roles for each status.

This might create role strain. Role strain
is when a single status contains conflicting

roles. For example, being a parent. Of that
list of four roles of being a parent,

being loving, nurturing, providing, a disciplinarian,
are any of those roles conflicting? Well,

possibly. Imagine you have a son named Billy,
and the little Billy loves to play baseball.

Little Billy loves to play baseball in the
house. Well, what's about to happen? Eventually

something is going to break. In many kids,
when they break something, when they're in

trouble, they cry. It becomes a defensive
mechanism.

In that situation, what do you do? As a parent,
it's supposed to be nurturing. Do you comfort

Billy so that he doesn't cry? Or do you discipline
Billy to teach him a lesson about not playing

baseball in the house? It would be very difficult,
very challenging to discipline Billy, which

is one of your roles as a parent, or also
being loving and nurturing to Billy, which

are another set of roles of being a parent.
Many of our statuses have roles that we can't

complete all at one time. We sometimes have
to choose which role will we focus on in this

moment. Will we focus on being loving? Or
will we focus on disciplining?

Another issue that may arise is role conflict.
This is when two or more statuses contain

conflicting roles. Note this. Role strain
is when a single status contains conflicting

roles. Role conflict is when two or more statuses
contain conflicting roles. For example, being

a parent and being an employee. Each one of
these statuses has multiple roles. Being an

employee means we must be at work on time,
complete our work and not leave early. But

being a parent means we have to be nurturing,
and therefore a child. What do we do if our

son or daughter gets out to school early?
Has to be picked up at noon, but we have to

be on work and in fact on that day, there's
a meeting that we cannot skip.

Our role attached to being an employee says
we have to be at work. But the role attached

to that status of being a parent says, "No,
you have to pick up your child." We can't do

do both at the same time. We have to choose
one over the other. This is role conflict.

When the roles are two different statuses
conflict with one another. We all experience

this. I'm sure we've all experience this already,
either will in the future. We've all had that

situation and in which we have to be at two
places at once because two different statuses

of ours required two different roles, required
conflicting roles.

For example, have you ever been in class when
you're also supposed to be at work? Or at

work when you should be in class? Again, two
statuses with conflicting demands. Now, we

all were experience role strain and role conflict,
that is a given. What important here is how

we deal with role strain and role conflict.
Now hopefully, we can prioritize and decide

which status is more important at any given
moment and obey that role. But other times

it's not as easy. Other times, it's a little
bit more complicated, which is one of the

challenges of life.
Now, with these, I hope you understand what

status and roles are, as well as the sub-components
such as achieved status, ascribed status,

master status, role strain and role conflict.

